BUILDING-GUIDED PSEUDO-LABEL
LEARNING FOR CROSS-MODAL BUILDING
DAMAGE MAPPING
Jiepan Li
Wuhan University
430072 Wuhan, China
jiepanli@whu.edu.cnHe Huang
Wuhan University
430072 Wuhan, China
huang he@whu.edu.cnYu Sheng
Wuhan University
430072 Wuhan, China
shengyu@whu.edu.cnYujun Guo
Wuhan University
430072 Wuhan, China
yujunguo@whu.edu.cnWei He∗
Wuhan University
430072 Wuhan, China
weihe1990@whu.edu.cn
Abstract —Accurate building damage assessment using bi-
temporal multi-modal remote sensing images is essential for
effective disaster response and recovery planning. This study
proposes a novel Building-Guided Pseudo-Label Learning Frame-
work to address the challenges of mapping building damage
from pre-disaster optical and post-disaster SAR images. First,
we train a series of building extraction models using pre-
disaster optical images and building labels. To enhance building
segmentation, we employ multi-model fusion and test-time aug-
mentation strategies to generate pseudo-probabilities, followed
by a low-uncertainty pseudo-label training method for further
refinement. Next, a change detection model is trained on bi-
temporal cross-modal images and damaged building labels. To
improve damage classification accuracy, we introduce a building-
guided low-uncertainty pseudo-label refinement strategy, which
leverages building priors from the previous step to guide pseudo-
label generation for damaged buildings, reducing uncertainty and
enhancing reliability. Experimental results on the 2025 IEEE
GRSS Data Fusion Contest dataset demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach, which achieved the highest mIoU score (54.28%)
and secured first place in the competition. The source code will
be available at BGPLL.
Index Terms —Building damage mapping, cross-modal, change
detection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Building damage assessment [1] is crucial for post-disaster
response and recovery planning, providing essential informa-
tion for emergency management, resource allocation, and re-
construction efforts. With the increasing availability of remote
sensing (RS) data [2], bi-temporal multi-modal imagery, such
as optical and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images, has
become a key resource for damage assessment [3]. Optical
images capture high-resolution visual details under normal
lighting conditions [4, 5], while SAR images provide robust
structural information regardless of weather and illumina-
tion [6]. However, integrating these modalities for accurate
damage mapping poses significant challenges due to differ-
ences in imaging geometry ( e.g., perspective and illumina-
tion), resolution disparities, inconsistent spatial coverage, and
modality-specific noise artifacts such as speckle in SAR, all
of which hinder accurate pixel-wise feature alignment.
Corresponding author: Wei He.To advance research in this field, the 2025 IEEE GRSS Data
Fusion Contest introduced the ”All-Weather Building Damage
Mapping” challenge [7]. This competition focuses on assessing
building damage using bi-temporal multi-modal images, with
a dataset consisting of pre-disaster optical images and post-
disaster SAR images at submeter resolution. The dataset is
annotated with four classes: background, intact buildings, dam-
aged buildings, and destroyed buildings. A major challenge
in this task lies in the substantial differences between optical
and SAR imagery, which complicate feature alignment and
damage classification. During the evaluation, models are tested
on unseen image pairs to generate damage assessments, with
performance measured by the mean Intersection over Union
(mIoU) metric.
To address these challenges, we propose a Building-Guided
Pseudo-Label Learning Framework that leverages building pri-
ors to enhance damage classification. Our framework consists
of two key stages: building extraction and damaged building
change detection. In the first stage, we train a series of
building extraction models using pre-disaster optical images
and building labels. To further refine building segmenta-
tion results, we incorporate multi-model fusion and test-time
augmentation strategies to generate pseudo-probabilities for
buildings, followed by a low-uncertainty pseudo-label training
method. We train a change detection model using bi-temporal
cross-modal images and damaged building labels based on the
reliable building priors from the first stage. To improve detec-
tion accuracy, we introduce a building-guided low-uncertainty
pseudo-label refinement strategy, which leverages building
priors from the first stage to guide pseudo-label generation for
damaged buildings. This reduces uncertainty in training labels
and enhances the model’s ability to distinguish different levels
of building damage.
We evaluate our approach on the official test set of the
2025 IEEE GRSS Data Fusion Contest. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, achieving
the highest mIoU score of 54.28%, ranking first place in
the competition. These findings highlight the potential of our
method for improving building damage mapping accuracy in
real-world disaster scenarios. The main contributions of thisarXiv:2505.04941v1  [cs.CV]  8 May 2025
---PAGE BREAK---
Fig. 1. Architecture of our proposed Cross-Modal Building Damage Mapping Framework.
paper are summarized as follows:
1) We propose a Building-Guided Pseudo-Label Learning
Framework that integrates building priors to improve
cross-modal building damage mapping.
2) We introduce a low-uncertainty pseudo-label refinement
strategy to enhance label reliability and reduce the
impact of modal discrepancies.
3) Our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance,
ranking first in the 2025 IEEE GRSS Data Fusion
Contest, demonstrating its effectiveness in real-world
disaster assessment.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 details our proposed framework, including building seg-
mentation, damaged building change detection, and pseudo-
label refinement. Section 3 and Section 4 present experimental
results and the corresponding analysis. Finally, Section 5
concludes the paper and discusses future research directions.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overview
As illustrated in Fig. 1, our building-guided pseudo-label
learning framework comprises two main stages. In the first
stage, we train multiple building extraction models using
pre-disaster optical images and their corresponding building
annotations. To improve the quality of segmentation results,
we employ a multi-model fusion strategy and test-time aug-
mentation to generate pseudo-probability maps, which aresubsequently refined using a low-uncertainty guided training
strategy.
In the second stage, we train a change detection model
(UACD [8]) using bi-temporal and cross-modal images, along
with damaged building annotations. To further enhance detec-
tion performance, we introduce a building-guided pseudo-label
refinement approach, leveraging building priors from the first
stage. This method helps reduce the uncertainty of the label
and strengthens the model’s ability to accurately differentiate
between the varying levels of damage to the building.
B. Binary Building Extraction
This stage involves three major components: (1) Building
Extraction Model Training, (2) Pseudo-Label Generation, and
(3) Low-Uncertainty Pseudo-Label Training. Initially, we train
multiple segmentation models using labeled pre-disaster opti-
cal images. Next, ensemble learning and test-time augmenta-
tion are applied to produce reliable pseudo-probability maps.
Finally, a selective training scheme guided by uncertainty is
adopted to refine the predictions. Each step is detailed below.
1) Building Extraction Model Training: Following previous
works [9, 10], modeling long-range dependencies is crucial for
accurate segmentation in RS imagery. To this end, we adopt
three variants of the Pyramid Vision Transformer [11] (PVT-
v2-b2, PVT-v2-b3, and PVT-v2-b4) as encoders, each coupled
with a Feature pyramid network(FPN [12])-style decoder for
dense prediction.
---PAGE BREAK---
The official dataset is partitioned into 80% for training
and 20% for validation. Only pre-disaster optical images are
used as input, with binary labels supervising the training via
standard cross-entropy loss. We retain the best-performing
model from each configuration based on validation perfor-
mance, resulting in three models: M1,M2, and M3.
2) Pseudo-Label Generation: Using the trained models
(M1,M2, and M3), we generate pseudo-labels for pre-disaster
images in the test set through an ensemble strategy augmented
with test-time data augmentation. Given an input image I1, we
first apply horizontal flipping to obtain its augmented version
I2. The three models process both I1andI2, and the outputs
are averaged separately. The final pseudo-probability map is
calculated by combining the original and flipped predictions
as follows:
P1=M1(I1) +M2(I1) +M3(I1)
3,
P2=M1(I2) +M2(I2) +M3(I2)
3,
Pf=P1+De(P2)
2,(1)
where De(·)denotes the inverse horizontal flip operation to
align P2with the original spatial orientation.
3) Low-Uncertainty Pseudo-Label Training: To mitigate
the influence of noisy pseudo-labels, we design a low-
uncertainty guided training strategy. From the pseudo-
probability map Pf, we construct two types of supervision
signals: a hard label Ghand a soft label Gs, defined as follows:
Gh(x) =(
1,ifPf(x)≥0.5,
0,otherwise ,
Gs(x) = [Gh(x), Pf(x)],(2)
where xrepresents a spatial location, and [·]denotes channel-
wise concatenation.
During training, the model prediction Ofor an input Iis
used to compute a pixel-wise entropy map, representing pre-
diction uncertainty. This entropy is normalized to En∈[0,1].
Pixels with En<0.3are considered reliable and supervised
using the hard label Ghvia cross-entropy loss. For uncertain
pixels, we employ a self-training scheme by aligning the model
outputs with Gsthrough Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence.
C. Bi-Temporal Building Change Detection
This stage follows a similar structure to binary building
extraction, consisting of three key steps: (1) Change Detec-
tion Model Training, (2) Pseudo-Label Generation, and (3)
Building-Guided Low-Uncertainty Pseudo-Label Training.
1) Change Detection Model Training: We adopt the
UACD [8] architecture, removing its uncertainty modeling
components to reduce computational overhead while retaining
the core bi-temporal fusion mechanism. The model is trained
on the image pairs from the official training split and evaluated
on the Phase 1 validation set. The top five models are selected
for ensemble construction to generate pseudo-labels for the test
set in the next stage.2) Pseudo-Label Generation: We generate pseudo-labels
Pcdfor the bi-temporal image pairs in the test set using
the ensemble of top-performing models combined with test-
time augmentation. The procedure mirrors that of the binary
building extraction stage. Each pseudo-label Pcdis a four-
channel probability map, where each channel corresponds to
the predicted probability of a specific damage category.
3) Building-Guided Low-Uncertainty Pseudo-Label Train-
ing: To address noise in the pseudo-labels, we propose a
building-guided low-uncertainty training strategy. Given the
pseudo-probability map Pcd, we define a hard label Gcd
hand
a soft label Gcd
sas:
Gcd
h(x) = arg max
cP(c)
cd(x),
Gcd
s(x) =
Gcd
h(x), Pcd(x)
,(3)
where xdenotes a pixel location and [·]indicates channel-wise
concatenation.
During training, bi-temporal features extracted by the en-
coder (PVT-v2-b2) are modulated using the binary building
map obtained in the first stage. This guidance helps enhance
building-related features and preserves structural consistency.
Given a bi-temporal input pair (Ipre, Ipost), the model gen-
erates an output Ocd, from which a pixel-wise entropy map
is derived to estimate prediction uncertainty. The normalized
entropy Ecd
n∈[0,1]is used to distinguish between reliable
and uncertain regions.
Pixels with Ecd
n<0.3are treated as confident and super-
vised using cross-entropy loss with hard labels Gcd
h. In con-
trast, for high-uncertainty pixels, we apply a self-regularization
scheme based on KL divergence with soft labels Gcd
s.
III. E XPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Settings
All experiments were conducted using PyTorch 1.8.1
(CUDA 11.1) on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB).
Models were trained for 100 epochs with the AdamW [13]
optimizer ( β1= 0.9,β2= 0.999) and a cosine annealing
schedule starting at 10−4. The loss function combines cross-
entropy and KL divergence with a fixed 2 : 1 weight ratio,
supervising low- and high-uncertainty regions, respectively.
All images were kept at their original 1024×1024 resolu-
tion. For building extraction, we ensembled PVT-v2-b2 and
PVT-v2-b3 models trained with our Low-Uncertainty Pseudo-
Label framework, and applied horizontal flip-based test-time
augmentation (TTA). For change detection, we used a single
PVT-v2-b2 model trained with the Building-Guided strategy,
also evaluated with horizontal flip TTA.
B. Visual Comparison
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we present two representative exam-
ples to demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method.
It is evident that the compared change detection method,
ChangeMamba [14], fails to identify many damaged buildings.
Although UACD achieves more accurate detection, it still
misclassifies some damaged buildings as destroyed ones. In
---PAGE BREAK---
(a) Pre Disaster
 (b) Post Disaster
 (c) Ground Truth
 (d) ChangeMamba
 (e) UACD
 (f) Ours
Fig. 2. Visual comparison between our proposed framework and the compared methods. Notably, white, green, yellow, and red denote the background, intact
buildings, damaged buildings, and destroyed buildings, respectively.
TABLE I
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS ON THE DEVELOPMENT PHASE AND TEST
PHASE .
MethodDevelopment Phase IoU (%)mIoUBackground Intact Damaged Destroyed
CGNet 96.722 79.519 31.000 70.022 69.316
ChangeMamba 96.737 80.022 38.181 71.464 71.601
UACD 96.756 80.076 39.575 73.148 72.389
Ours (w/o bg) 96.811 80.700 44.618 74.105 74.105
Ours (with bg) 96.845 80.958 45.321 74.637 74.440
MethodTest Phase IoU (%)mIoUBackground Intact Damaged Destroyed
Ours (with bg) 97.995 67.304 9.748 42.086 54.283
bg denotes the use of the proposed building-guided strategy.
contrast, our building-guided pseudo-label learning strategy
effectively leverages building information and utilizes low-
uncertainty pseudo labels to guide the model in learning richer
damage-aware representations.
C. Quantitative Comparison
As shown in Tab. I, we compare the performance of
our proposed framework with several state-of-the-art (SOTA)
change detection methods, including Change Guiding Network
(CGNet[15]), ChangeMamba [14], and the Uncertainty-aware
Change Detection Framework (UACD [8]). We also evaluate
the effectiveness of our building-guided pseudo-label learn-
ing strategy by comparing the results with and without its
incorporation. The results clearly demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms the competing approaches in terms
of Intersection over Union (IoU) across all four categories.
In the development phase, where validation scenes are
similar to training data, all methods achieve relatively strong
performance in mapping damaged buildings. However, during
testing, with differing disaster scenes, most methods see a
performance drop. Our framework, however, maintains high
accuracy and robustness, helping our team achieve first place
in the 2025 IEEE GRSS Data Fusion Contest.
IV. D ISCUSSION
To evaluate the effectiveness of the low-uncertainty pseudo-
label training strategy, we visualize the uncertainty associated
Fig. 3. Visualization of pseudo-label uncertainty (uncer).
with the pseudo-labels. As shown in Fig. 3, the pseudo-labels
exhibit considerable uncertainty, particularly along building
boundaries. However, our strategy selectively leverages the
reliable, low-uncertainty predictions to guide the model in
learning more accurate and damage-aware representations.
Distinguishing partially damaged buildings is difficult due
to their blend of intact features and damage, along with
challenges like segregated datasets, varying damage patterns,
and resolution differences. As seen in the first phase, without
isolated validation and test scenarios, the “damaged” class had
significantly lower IoU, reflecting the model’s struggle in di-
verse disaster environments. Our uncertainty-guided approach,
incorporating building priors, showed slight improvement.
However, to further enhance detection, generative methods to
synthesize more partially damaged samples could provide the
model with better training data for realistic damage patterns.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a building-guided low-
uncertainty pseudo-label training framework for cross-modal
bi-temporal damaged building mapping. Our method achieved
first place in Track 2 of the 2025 IEEE GRSS Data Fusion
Contest. In future work, we plan to further explore strategies
for improving the generalization ability of damaged building
mapping across diverse disaster scenes.
---PAGE BREAK---
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Zheng, Y . Zhong, J. Wang, A. Ma, and L. Zhang, “Build-
ing damage assessment for rapid disaster response with a
deep object-based semantic change detection framework: From
natural disasters to man-made disasters,” Remote Sensing of
Environment , vol. 265, p. 112636, 2021.
[2] H. Huang, W. He, H. Zhang, Y . Xia, and L. Zhang, “Stfdiff:
Remote sensing image spatiotemporal fusion with diffusion
models,” Information Fusion , p. 102505, 2024.
[3] H. Chen, N. Yokoya, and M. Chini, “Fourier domain structural
relationship analysis for unsupervised multimodal change detec-
tion,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing ,
vol. 198, pp. 99–114, 2023.
[4] Y . Guo, W. He, Y . Xia, and H. Zhang, “Blind single-image-
based thin cloud removal using a cloud perception integrated
fast fourier convolutional network,” ISPRS Journal of Pho-
togrammetry and Remote Sensing , vol. 206, pp. 63–86, 2023.
[5] J. Li, H. Huang, W. He, H. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Overcoming
the uncertainty challenges in flood rapid mapping with multi-
source optical data,” in IGARSS 2024-2024 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium . IEEE, 2024, pp.
780–784.
[6] H. Huang, J. Li, W. He, H. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Overcoming
the uncertainty challenges in flood rapid mapping with sar
data,” in IGARSS 2024-2024 IEEE International Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium . IEEE, 2024, pp. 767–771.
[7] H. Chen, J. Song, O. Dietrich, C. Broni-Bediako, W. Xuan,
J. Wang, X. Shao, Y . Wei, J. Xia, C. Lan et al. , “Bright: A
globally distributed multimodal building damage assessment
dataset with very-high-resolution for all-weather disaster re-
sponse,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06019 , 2025.
[8] J. Li, W. He, Z. Li, Y . Guo, and H. Zhang, “Overcoming
the uncertainty challenges in detecting building changes from
remote sensing images,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and
Remote Sensing , vol. 220, pp. 1–17, 2025.
[9] J. Li, W. He, W. Cao, L. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Uanet: An
uncertainty-aware network for building extraction from remote
sensing images,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing , vol. 62, pp. 1–13, 2024.
[10] J. Li, Y . Wei, T. Wei, and W. He, “A comprehensive deep-
learning framework for fine-grained farmland mapping from
high-resolution images,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing , vol. 63, pp. 1–15, 2025.
[11] W. Wang, E. Xie, X. Li, D.-P. Fan, K. Song, D. Liang, T. Lu,
P. Luo, and L. Shao, “Pvt v2: Improved baselines with pyramid
vision transformer,” CVM , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 415–424, 2022.
[12] T.-Y . Lin, P. Doll ´ar, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and
S. Belongie, “Feature pyramid networks for object detection,”
inProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , 2017, pp. 2117–2125.
[13] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Fixing weight decay regularization
in adam,” 2018.
[14] H. Chen, J. Song, C. Han, J. Xia, and N. Yokoya, “Change-
mamba: Remote sensing change detection with spatiotemporal
state space model,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing , vol. 62, pp. 1–20, 2024.
[15] C. Han, C. Wu, H. Guo, M. Hu, J. Li, and H. Chen, “Change
guiding network: Incorporating change prior to guide change
detection in remote sensing imagery,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing ,
vol. 16, pp. 8395–8407, 2023.
---PAGE BREAK---
